good evening i'm ruth hinerfeld of the
league of women voters education fund
we're pleased to be in baltimore for the
first of our 1980 presidential debates
the league is a non-partisan organization
we're presenting these debates to
provide citizens an opportunity to see
and hear the candidates state their
positions on important issues of concern
to us all our moderator is bill moyers
thank you mrs hinerfeld
my colleagues and i agreed to
participate tonight although the
questioners are limited by the
constraints of the format because we
thought with the league of women voters
that it is desirable to seek a
comparison of views on a few issues in a
joint appearance by the men who would be
the next president of the united states
former governor ronald reagan a
republican party candidate and
congressman john anderson who is
running as an independent accepted the
league of women voters invitation to be
here president carter declined mr
reagan and mr anderson will respond
with their views on certain issues posed
by questions from my colleagues carol
loomis of fortune magazine daniel
greenberg a syndicated columnist charles
corddry of the baltimore sun lee may of
the los angeles times james bryant quinn
jane bryant quinn of newsweek and soma
golden of the new york times none of the
questions has been submitted in advance
to either the league of women voters or
to the candidates or to their
representatives gentlemen thank you both
for coming the ground rules you agreed
upon with the league are brief each
panelist will ask a single question you
will have two and a half minutes in
which to respond after you've stated
your positions in those two and a half
minutes each of you will have one minute
and 15 seconds
for response at the close of the debate
each of you will have three minutes for
closing remarks we ask the convention center
audience to abide by one simple ground
rule please do not applaud or express
approval or disapproval during the
debate you may do that on november 4
having won the toss of the coin mr
anderson will respond to the first
question from carol loomis mr anderson
opinion polls show that the american
public sees inflation as the country's
number one economic problem yet as
individuals they oppose cures that hurt
them personally elected officials have
played along by promising to cure
inflation while backing away from tough
programs that might hurt one special
interest group or another and by
actually adding inflationary elements to
the system such as indexing they have
gone for what is politically popular
rather than for what might work and
amount to leadership my question and
please be specific is what politically
unpopular measures are you willing to
endorse push and stay with that might
provide real progress in reducing
inflation miss loomis i think it's very
appropriate that the first question in
this first debate of campaign 80 should
relate to the economy of the country
because it seems to me that the people
who are watching us tonight 221 million
americans are truly concerned about the
poor rate of performance of the american
economy over the last four years
governor reagan is not responsible for
what has happened over the last four
years nor am i the man who should be
here tonight to respond to those charges
chose not to attend but i want to answer
as specifically as i can the question
that you have just put to me let me
tell you that i first of all oppose an
election year tax cut whether it is the
10 across-the-board tax cut promised to
the taxpayers by my opponent in this
debate tonight or whether it is the 27.5
billion tax cut
promised on the 20th of august by
president carter i simply think that
when we are confronting a budget deficit
this year and this fiscal year will end
in about 10 days and we are confronted
with the possibility of a deficit of 60
billion perhaps as much as 63
billion that that simply
would be irresponsible that once again
the printing presses will start to roll
once again we will see the monetization
of that debt result in a higher rate of
inflation even though we've seen some
hopeful signs perhaps in the flash
report on the third quarter that perhaps
the economy is coming out of the
recession we've also seen the rise in
the rate of the prime we have seen
mortgage rates back up again a sure
sign of inflation in the housing
industry what i would propose and i
proposed it way back in march when i was
a candidate in my own state of illinois
i proposed 11.3 billion
specifically in cuts in the
federal budget i think we've got to have
fiscal restraint and i said at that time
that one of the things that we could do
that perhaps would save as much as 5 billion
to 7 billion according to
one of the leading members of the house
budget committee was to recalculate the
index that is used to determine the cost
of living benefits that are paid to
civil service retirees to military
retirees that we ought to in addition to
that we ought to pay those retirement
benefits on the basis of once a year
rather than twice a year and save 750
billion in other words mr anderson
fiscal restraint
i think is necessary your time is up ms loomis governor reagan repeating
the question and i would ask you again
to engage in as many specifics as you
possibly can
what politically unpopular measures are
you willing to endorse push and stay
with that might provide real progress in
reducing inflation i believe that the
only unpopular measures actually that
could be or would be applied would be
unpopular with the government and with those
perhaps some special interest groups who
are tied closely to government i believe
that inflation today is caused by
government simply spending more than
government takes in at the same time
that government has imposed upon business
and industry from the shopkeeper on the
corner to the biggest industrial plant
in america
countless harassing regulations and
punitive taxes that have reduced
productivity at the same time they have
increased the cost of production and
when you are reducing productivity at
the same time that you are turning out
printing-press money in excessive
amounts you're causing inflation and it
isn't really higher prices it's just you
are reducing the value of the money you
are robbing the american people of their
savings and so the plan that i have
proposed and contrary to what john says
my plan is for a phased-in tax cut over
a three-year period tax increase and
depreciation allowances for business and
industry to give them the capital to
refurbish plant and equipment research
and development improved technology all
of which we see our foreign competitors
having and we have the greatest
percentage of outmoded industrial plant
and equipment of any of the industrial
nations produce more have stable money
supply and give the people of this
country a greater share of their own
savings now i know that this has been
called inflationary by my opponent and
by the man who isn't here tonight but i
don't see where it is inflationary to
have people keep more of their earnings
and spend it and it isn't inflationary
for government to take that money away
from them and spend it on the things it
wants to spend it on i believe we need
incentive for the individual and for
business and industry and i believe the
plan that i have submitted with detailed
backing and which has been approved by a
number of our leading economists in the
country is based on projections
conservative projections out for the
next five years that indicates that this
plan would by 1983 result in a balanced
budget we have to remember when we talk
a tax
cut we're only talking about reducing a tax
increase because this administration has
left us with a built-in tax increase
that will amount to 86 billion
next year your time is up and 500
billion over the next five
mr anderson mr movers in addition to saying that
this is no time for a tax cut in view of
the incipient signs of renewed inflation
in addition to calling for restraint in
federal spending 15 months ago i
also suggested we ought to have an
emergency excise tax on gasoline i say
that because i think this year we will
send 90 billion out of this
country to pay for imported oil even
though that those imports have been
reduced and since i first made that
proposal 15 months ago the price of
gasoline which was then 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 cents has
gone up to about a dollar and 30 cents
in other words we've had a huge increase
of about 50 cents a gallon since that
time and all of that increase has gone
out of this country or much of it into
the pockets of opec oil producers for as
i have proposed we ought to take put
that tax on here at home reduce our
consumption of that imported oil recycle
those proceeds then back into the
pockets of the american workers by
reducing their tax payments their social
security tax payments by 50 that i
think in addition would be an anti
inflationary measure that would
strengthen the economy of this country
mr reagan well i cannot see where a
0.50 a gallon tax applied to gasoline
would have changed the price of gasoline
it would still have gone up as much as
it has and the 50 cents would be added
on top of that and it would be a tax
paid by the consumers and then we're
asked to believe that some way they
would get this back to the consumers
well why why take it in the first place
if you're going to give it back why not
leave it with them and john spoke about
15 years ago on the position that he for
15 months ago and what he believed in 15
months ago he was a cosigner and
advocating the very tax cut that i am
proposing and said that that would be a
forward step in fighting inflation and
that it would be beneficial to the
working people of this country
the next question go
to mr reagan from daniel greenberg well
gentlemen what i'd like to say first is
i think the panel and the audience would
appreciate responsiveness to the
questions rather than repetitions of
your campaign addresses my question for
the governor is every serious
examination of the future supply of
energy and other essential resources
including air land and water finds that
we face shortages and skyrocketing
prices and that in many ways we're
pushing the environment too dangerous
limits i'd like to know specifically
what changes you would encourage and
require in american life styles in
automobile use housing land use and
general consumption to meet problems
that aren't going to respond to campaign
lullabye about minor conservation
efforts and more production but i
believe that conservation of course is
worthy in and of itself anything that
would preserve or help us use less
energy that would be fine and i'm for it
but i do not believe that conservation
alone is the answer to the present
energy problem because all you're doing
then is staving off by a short time the
day when you would come to the end of
the energy supply to say that we are
limited and in a dangerous point in this
country with regard to energy i think is
to ignore the fact the fact is that in
today's oil wells there is more oil
still there than we have so far taken
out and used but it would require what
is known as secondary or tertiary
efforts to bring it out of the ground
and this is known oil reserves known
supplies there are hundreds of millions
of acres of land that have been taken
out of circulation by the government for
whatever reason they have that is
believed by the most knowledgeable oil
geologists to contain probably more oil
and natural gas than we have used so far
since we drilled at first well 121 years
ago we have a coal supply that is equal
to 50 of the world's coal supply good
for centuries in this country i grant
you that prices may go up because as you
go further and have to go deeper you are
adding to the cost of production we have
nuclear power which i believe with the
safest least most stringent of safety
requirements could meet our energy needs
for the next couple of decades while we
go forward exploring the areas of solar
power and other forms of energy that
might be renewable and that would not be
exhaustible all of these things can be
done when you stop and think that we are
only drilling on 2 have leased only 2
of the possible possibility for oil of
the whole continental shelf around the
united states when you stop to think
that the government has taken over a
hundred million acres of land out of
circulation in alaska alone that is
believed by geologists to contain much
in the line of minerals and energy
sources then i think it is the
government and the government with its
own restrictions and regulations that is
creating the energy crisis that we are
indeed an energy rich nation i would
like to say at this point that the
candidates requested the same questions
to be repeated for the sake of precision
on the part of the interrogator so mr
greenberg you may address mr andersen
mr andersen i'd like to know
specifically what changes you would
encourage and require in american life
styles in automobile use housing land
use and consumption to meet problems
that aren't going to respond to campaign
lullabye about minor conservation
efforts and more production mr
greenberg i simply cannot allow to go on
past the statements that have just been
made by mr reagan who once again has
demonstrated it i think a total
misunderstanding of the energy crisis
that confronts not only this country but
the world when he suggests that we have
27 years supply of natural gas 47 years
supply of oil and all the rest and that
we really all we have to do is to get
the government off the back of the oil
industry and that's going to be enough i
agree with what i think is the major
premise of your question sir that we are
going to have to create a new
conservation ethic in the minds of the
american people and
simply why i proposed fifteen months ago
the emergency excise tax on gasoline
that i did i did it as a security
measure to be sure because i would
rather see us reduce the consumption of
imported oil than have to send american
boys to fight in the persian gulf but at
the same time i think it's going to take
a dramatic measure of that kind to
convince the american people that we
will have to reduce the use of the
private automobile we simply cannot have
people sitting one behind the wheel of a
car and these long traffic jams going in
and out of our great cities we are going
to have to resort to van pooling to
carpooling we're going to have to
develop better community transportation
systems so that with buses and light
rail we can replace the private
automobile in those places where it
clearly is not energy-efficient i think
that with respect to housing when we are
consuming even though our per capita
income today is about the same as that
of the federal republic of germany we
are consuming about by a factor of two
the amount of energy that they consume
in that country surely there are things
that we can do in the retrofitting in
the redesign of our homes not only of
our houses but of our commercial
structures as well that will make it
possible for us to achieve according to
one study that was published a short
time ago the harvard business school
study indicated that just in the
commercial sector alone of the economy
we could say between thirty and forty
percent of the energy that we consume in
this country today so i think yes we
will have to change in a very
appreciable way some of the lifestyles
that we now enjoy mr reagan well as
i've said i am not an enemy of
conservation i wouldn't be called a
conservative if i were but when my
figures are challenged as the president
himself challenged them after i made
them i think it should be called to the
attention of john and the others here
that my figures are the figures of the
department of energy which has not been
overly optimistic in recent years
as to how much supply we have left that
is the same government that in 1920 told
us we only had enough oil left for 13
and 19 years later told us we only had
enough left for another 15 years as for
saving energy and conserving the
american people haven't been doing badly
at that because in industry today we're
producing more over the last several
years and at 12 percent less use of
energy than we were back in about 1973
and motorists are using 8 percent less
than they were back at that time of the
oil embargo so i think we are proving
that we can go forward with conservation
and benefit from that but also i think
it is safe to say that we do have
sources of energy that have not yet been
used or found mr anderson
let's greenberg i think my opponent in
this debate tonight is overlooking one
other very important fact and that is
that we cannot look at this as simply a
national problem even though it's true
that perhaps between now and the end of
the decade our total consumption of oil
may not increase by more than perhaps a
million or two barrels of oil a day the
rest of the western world we are told
may see its consumption increase from
2050 1 million barrels to about 66
million and that additional 15 million
barrels is going to cause scarcity it is
going to cause scarcity in world markets
because there are at least five
reputable studies one even by the
american petroleum institute itself that
i think clearly indicates that somewhere
along around the end of the present
decade total world demand for oil is
simply going to exceed total available
supplies i think that conservation i
think that a change in lifestyles is
necessary and we had better begin to
plan for that now rather than later this
question goes to you mr anderson from
charles corddry mr anderson you and mr
reagan both speak for better defense for
stronger defense and for programs that
would mean spending more money you do
not either of you however come to great
with a fundamental problem of manning
the forces of who shall serve and how
the burden will be distributed this will
surely be a critical issue in the next
presidential term you both oppose the
draft the questions are how would you
fill the under strength combat forces
with numbers and quality without
reviving conscription and will you
commit yourself here tonight should you
become the commander in chief to propose
a draft however unpopular if it becomes
clear that voluntary means are not
working mr cordry i am well aware of
the present deficiencies in the armed
forces of this country when you have a
report as we did recently that six out
of ten conus divisions in this country
continent continental united states
army divisions simply could not pass a
readiness test that two out of three
divisions that were to be allocated to
the so-called rapid deployment force
could not meet a readiness test and in
most cases that failure to meet the test
was because of a lack of manning
requirements and inability to fill many
of the slots in those divisions yes i
have seen figures that indicate that
perhaps as of september 1980 this very
month that there is a shortage of about
104,000 in the ranks between efore and
inai and there were reports public
reports not long ago about ships that
could not leave american ports because
of a lack of crews i talked to one of
the leading former chiefs of naval
operations in my office a few weeks ago
who told me about 25,000 chief petty
officers being short but i think that
that is clearly related to the fact that
going back to the time when the
all-volunteer army was created in 1973
and i worked hard for it and supported
it we simply have failed to keep pace
with the cost of living and today on the
average the average serviceman is at
least 15 and i happen to think that's a
very modest estimate 15 below
what has happened to the cost of living
over that period of time does a result
the families if some of you are young
servicemen are on food stamps today and
i think that's shocking it's shameful so
yes i told the american legion national
convention the vfw national convention
when i spoke to each of those bodies i
outlined a very specific program of
increasing pay and allowances
re-enlistment bonuses that only makes
sense but i would leave you with this
thought circuit circuit to be quite
specific in my answer to your question
that of course to protect the vital
interests of this country if that became
impossible if i could not despite the
very best efforts that i asked the
congress to put forward to raise those
paying incentives and allowances of
course i would not leave this country go
undefended mr cordry mr reagan i will
just repeat the two questions how would
you fill the under-strength combat
forces with numbers and with quality
without reviving conscription and will
you commit yourself here tonight should
you become the commander in chief to
propose a draft however unpopular if it
becomes clear that voluntary means are
not solving our manpower problems mr
cordry it's a shame now that there are
only two of us here debating because the
two that are here are in more agreement
and disagreement on this particular
issue and the only one who would be
disagreeing with us is the president if
he were president
i too believe in the voluntary military
as a matter of fact today the shortages
and noncommissioned officers that john
mentioned are such that if we tried to
have a draft today we wouldn't have the
noncommissioned officers to train the
draftees i believe the answer lies in
just recognizing human nature and how we
make everything else work in this
country when we want it to work
recognize that we have a voluntary
military we are asking for men and women
to join the military as a career and
we're asking them to deal with the most
sophisticated of equipment
and a young man is out there on a
billion-dollar carrier in charge of the
maintenance of a twenty five million
dollar aircraft working a hundred hours
a week at times and he's earning less
for himself and his family while he's
away from his family then he could earn
if he were in one of the most menial
jobs working 40 hours a week here at
home as an errand aid to enlistment we
had an aide 46 percent of the people who
enlisted in the voluntary military up
until 1977 said they did so for one
particular reason the gi bill of rights
the fact that by serving in the military
they could provide for a future college
education in 1977 we took that away from
the military that meant immediately 46
percent of your people that were signing
up had no reason for signing up so i
think it is a case of pay scale of
recognizing that if we're going to have
young men and women responsible for our
security dealing with this sophisticated
equipment then for heaven's sakes let's
go out and have a pay scale that is
commensurate with the sacrifice that
we're asking of them along with this i
think we need something else that has
been allowed to deteriorate
we need a million-man active reserve
that could be called up in an instance
notice and that would be also trained
ready to use that type of equipment both
of these i think would respond to the
proper kind of incentives that we could
offer these people the other day i just
hastened i just saw one example down in
texas i saw a high school that is
military your time is up
miss knocking i'm sorry i'll catch up
with it later you can finish that after
it's over mr anderson the demars i must
say that i think i have a better
opportunity however refining the
necessary funds to pay what admittedly
will be very very substantial sums of
money we signed one bill or we passed
one bill just a couple of weeks ago in
the house of representatives for five
hundred million dollars a half a billion
dollars that is just a down payment in
my opinion but unlike governor reagan i
do not support a boondoggle like the mx
missile i've just gotten a report from
the air force that indicates that the
thirty-year life cycle cost of that
is going to be a hundred million dollars
the initial cost is about fifty four
billion dollars and then when you add in
the additional cost not only the
construction of the system the missiles
and the personnel and so on when you add
in the additional costs over the like
lifecycle of that system over 100
billion dollars i would propose to save
the taxpayers of this country from that
kind of costly boondoggle mr reagan
well let me just say that with regard to
that same missile system i happen to
support and believe in the missile
itself but that's not the 54 billion
dollar cost that john is talking about
he's talking about that fantastic plan
of the administration to take thousands
and thousands of square miles out in the
western states and first he was good at
digger racetrack and have it going
around on the racetrack so it would meet
the requirements of salt to treaty and
now he's decided it'll have a straight
up and down things so it can be both
verifiable and yet high double from the
soviet union
we need the missile i think because we
are so out of balance
strategically that we lack a deterrent
to a possible first assault but i am not
in favor of the of the plan that is so
costly and therefore if i only had
another second left i'd say that that
high school class in a military training
40 of its 80 graduates last year entered
the united states service academies west
point annapolis in the air force academy
and to see those young men made me very
proud and to realize that there are
young people in this country that are
prepared to go into that kind of a
career in service of their country this
question comes to you mr reagan from my
colleague lemay mr reagan the military
is not the only area in crisis american
cities are physically wearing out as
housing streets sewers and budgets all
fall apart and all of this is piled upon
the emotional strain that comes from
refugees and racial confrontations now
i'm wondering what specific plans do you
have for federal involvement in saving
our cities
from these physical and emotional crises
and how would you carry out those plans
in addition to raising military pay
without going against your pledge of
fiscal restraint i don't think i'd have
to go against that pledge i think one of
the problems today with the cities is
federal aid the mayors that i've talked
to in some of our leading cities tell me
that the federal grants that come with
for a specific cause or a specific
objective come with such red tape such
priorities established by a bureaucracy
in washington that the local government
hands are tied with regard to using that
money as they feel it could best be used
and for what they think might be the top
priority if they had that money without
those government restrictions every one
of them has told me they could make
great savings and make far greater use
of the money what i have been advocating
is why don't we start with the federal
government turning back tax sources to
states and local governments as well as
the responsibilities for those programs
seventy-five percent of the people live
in the cities i don't know of a city in
america that doesn't have the kind of
problems you're talking about but where
are we getting the money that the
federal government is putting out to
help them new york is being taxed for
money that will then go to detroit but
detroit is being taxed for money that
let's say will go to chicago
while chicago is being taxed to help
with the problems in philadelphia
wouldn't it make a lot more sense if the
government let them keep their own money
there in the first place but there are
other things that we can do with the
inner cities and i believed i have
talked of having zones in those cities
that are run-down where there is a high
percentage of people on welfare and
offer tax incentives the government
isn't getting a tax now from businesses
there because they aren't there or from
individuals who are on welfare rather
than working and why don't we offer
incentives for business and industry to
start up in those zones give them a tax
moratorium for a period if they build
and develop their the individuals that
would then get jobs give them a break
that encourages them
leave the social welfare programs and go
to work
we could have an urban homestead act
we've got thousands and thousands of
homes owned by government boarded up
being vandalized that have been taken
into mortgage foreclosures what if we
had a homestead act and said to the
people for 1 we sell you this house all
you have to do is agree to refurbish it
make it habitable and live in it just as
a hundred or more years ago we did with
the open land in this country bourbon or
country reno of homesteading mr mee mr
anderson let me ask you what specific
plans do you have for federal
involvement in saving cities from the
physical and emotional crises that
confront them and how would you carry
out those plans in addition to raising
military pay without going against your
pledge of fiscal restraint mr may i
recently saw a princeton university
study that indicated that the cities of
america the large cities of this country
are in worse shape today than they were
in 1960 it seems to totally balai the
claim that i heard president carter make
a few days ago that he was the first
president that had come forth with a
real urban strategy to meet the problems
of urban america incidentally just this
past week the crown jewel in that
program that he had devised was stolen i
guess because a conference committee
turned down the ambitious plan that he
had to increase the amount of money that
would be available to the economic
development administration for loan
guarantees and direct loans and credits
i'm happy to say that in contrast to
that the anderson lucy platform for
america program for the 80s has devoted
considerable time and in very specific
detail we have talked about two things
that ought to be done to aid orban
america we call first of all for the
creation of a four billion dollar urban
reinvestment trust fund to do exactly
what you spoke about in your question to
rebuild the streets
to rebuild the cities the leaking water
mains i was in north pittsburgh
i think it was a few weeks ago on my
campaign the water mains in that city
had begun to leak and literally there
wasn't money available to fix them and
until we can begin to recreate the basic
infrastructure of the great cities of
america particularly in the upper
midwest and in the northeast they simply
are not going to provide the kind of
economic climate that will enable them
to retain industry enable them to retain
the kind of solid industrial base that
they need so that they can provide jobs
we have also provided in our program for
a four billion dollar community trust
fund and we've told you where the money
is coming from it's going to come from
the dedication by nineteen eighty four
of the excise revenues that today are
being collected by the federal
government on alcohol and tobacco that
money i think ought to be put in to
rebuilding the base of our cities in
addition to that jobs programs to
re-employ the youth in our cities would
be very high on my priority list both
the youth opportunities act of 1980 and
a billion dollar program that i would
recommend to put youth to work in energy
projects in conservation projects in
projects that would carry out some of
the great national goals of our country
mr reagan your response yes government
clear john claims that he is making
plane where the money will come from it
will come from the pockets of the people
it will come from the pockets of the
people who are living in those very
areas and the problem is with
governments federal state and local
taking forty four cents out of every
dollar earned that the federal
government has preempted too many of the
tax sources and if the cities if
pittsburgh does not have the money to
fix the leaking water mains it's because
the federal government is preempted now
the federal government is going to turn
around and say well you have this
problem we will now hand you the money
to do it but the federal government
doesn't make money
it just takes it from the people and in
my view this is not the answer to the
stand to the south bronx as i did in the
spot where jimmy carter made his promise
that he was going to with multi-billion
dollar programs refurbished that area
that looks like bombed out london in
world war 2 i stood there and i met the
people and i heard them ask just for
something that would give them hope and
i believe that with all of the promises
have been broken they've never been
carried out but i believe that my plan
might offer an opportunity for that if
we would move into those areas and let
encourage with the tax incentives the
private sector to develop and to create
the jobs for the people missed anderson
well of course where has the private
sector been governor reagan during the
years that our cities have been
deteriorating it seems to me that to
deny the responsibility of the federal
government to do something about our
crumbling cities is to deny the
opportunity for one thing to 55 percent
of the black population of our country
that is locked within the inner cities
of the metropolitan areas of our country
we simply cannot ignore the fact that in
those cities today we had 55 percent
youth unemployment among black and
hispanic youth and why is that it's
because they have lost their industry
and why have they lost their industry is
because they no longer present the kind
of viable economic climate that makes it
possible for industry to remain there or
to locate there i think government has a
responsibility to find jobs for the
youth of this country and that the place
to start is to assist in the very
important and necessary task of helping
cities rebuild jane bryant quinn has the
next question for you mr anderson mr
anderson many voters are very worried
that tax cuts nice as they are will
actually add to inflation and many
eminent conservatives have testified
that even business tax cuts as you have
proposed can be inflationary as long as
we have a budget deficit now mr reagan
has mentioned that he put out a
five-year economic forecast which indeed
he did but it can
hey no inflation number you have
published a detailed program but it too
doesn't have any hard numbers on it
about how these things work with
inflation so i would like to ask you if
you will commit to publish specific
forecasts within two weeks so that the
voters can absorb them and understand
them and analyze them showing exactly
what all these problems you've mentioned
tonight on energy on defense on the
cities how these impact on inflation and
what inflation is actually going to be
over five years
musquin i would be very happy to accept
the challenge of your question tonight
to tell the voters of this country
exactly what i think it's going to cost
because i believe that all too often in
past elections politicians have simply
been promising people things that they
cannot deliver when these presidential
debates were held just four years ago i
remember the incumbent president who was
willing to debate president ford telling
the american people that they simply
ought not to vote for somebody who
promised more than they could deliver
well we've seen what has happened
we haven't gotten either the economy's
in government that were promised we
haven't gotten the 4 inflation that we
were supposed to get at the end of mr
carter's first term instead we had i
think in the second quarter a consumer
price index registering around 12 and
nobody really knows with the latest
increase in the wholesale price index
that's about 18 on an annualized basis
what it's going to be let me say this i
think my programs are far less
inflationary than those of governor
reagan his own running mate when he was
running for the president's he said that
they would cost a 30 percent inflation
inside of two years and he cited his
leading economic adviser a very
distinguished economist paul mcavoy as
the source of that information he went
so far as to call it voodoo economics
i've been very careful i have been very
careful in saying that what i'm going to
do is to bring federal spending under
control first i would like to stand here
and promise the american people a tax
cut as governor reagan has done but you
know it's gotten to be about a hundred
two dollar difference somebody worked it
out and they figured out that between
the tax cut that governor reagan is
promising the american people and the
tax cut the jimmy carter is promising in
1981 he's is worth about a hundred and
twenty-two dollars more so you dear
voters are out there on the auction
block and these two candidates are
bidding for your votes and one is going
to give you one hundred and twenty two
dollars more if you happen to be in that
range of about a twenty thousand dollar
a year income i'm going to wait until i
see that that inflation rate is going
down before i even begin to phase in the
business tax cuts that i've talked about
but i think by improving productivity
they would be far less inflationary than
the consumption oriented tax cut that
governor reagan is recommending miss
quinn mr anderson i'll call you for
that forecast mr reagan will you
publish specific forecasts within two
weeks so that the voters can have time
to analyze and absorb them before the
election showing exactly what all these
things you discussed tonight for energy
cities and defense mean for inflation
over the next five years miss quinn i
don't have to i've done it we have a
backup baker tonight to my economic
speech of a couple of weeks ago in
chicago that gives all of the figures
and we used yes we use the can the
senate budget committees projections for
five years which are based on an average
inflation rate of seven and a half
percent which i think that under our
plan can be eliminated and eliminated
probably more quickly than our plan but
we wanted to be so conservative with it
that people would see how how well it
could be done
john's been in the congress for 20 years
and john tells us that first we've got
to reduce spending before we can reduce
taxes well if you've got a kid that's
extravagant you can lecture him all you
wanted about his extravagance or you can
cut his allowance and achieve the same
end much quicker the government has
never reduced government does not taxed
to go to get the money it needs
government always needs the money it
gets and when john talks about his
non-inflationary plan
as far as i have been able to learn
there are 88 proposals in it that call
for additional government spending
programs now i speak with some
confidence of our plan because i took
over a state california 10 of the
population of this nation a state that
if it were a nation would be the seventh
ranking economic power in the world and
that state we controlled spending we cut
the rate of increase in spending in half
but at the same time we gave back to the
people of california in tax rebates tax
credits tax cuts five billion seven
hundred million dollars i vetoed 993
measures without having a veto
and among those vetoes i stopped 16
billion dollars in additional spending
and the funny thing was that california
which is normally above the national
average in inflation and unemployment
for those six years for the first time
was below the national average in both
inflation and unemployment we have
considered inflation in our figures we
deliberately took figures that we
ourselves believed are too conservative
i believe the budget can be but balanced
by 1982 or 1983 and it is a combination
of planned reduction of the tax increase
that carter has built into the economy
and that's what he's counting on for his
plan that he's going to get a half a
trillion dollars more over the next five
years that he can use for additional
programs or hopefully someplace down the
line balancing the budget we believe
that that's too much additional money to
take out of the pockets of the people
mr anderson mr morris i'm not here to
debate governor reagan's record as
governor this is 1989 not 1966 but i do
know that despite his pledge to reduce
state government spending that it rose
from 4.6 billion dollars when he took
office in 1967 to ten point two billion
dollars during his eight years in office
spending in other words more than
doubled and it rose at a faster rate
then spending was rising in the federal
government but on his very optimistic
figures about his tax cut producing a
balanced budget by 1983 and the fact
that he is you
he says the figures of the senate budget
committee that senate budget committee
report does not accommodate all of the
reagan defense plans it doesn't
accommodate the expenditures that he
calls for for accelerated development
and deployment of a new batman strategic
bomber for a permanent fleet in the
indian ocean for the restoration of the
fleet to 600 ships to the development
and deployment of a dedicated modern
aircraft interceptor in other words i
have seen his program costed out to the
point where it would amount to more than
300 million dollars a year just for the
military and i think the figures that he
is given are simply not going to stand
up we would you have a comment material
some people look up figures and some
people make up figures and john has just
made up some very interesting figures we
took the senate report of course but we
did factor in our own ideas with regard
to increases in the projected military
spending that we believe would over a
period of time do what is necessary now
also with regard to the figures about
california the truth of the matter is we
did cut the increase in spending in half
it at this john doesn't quite realize
he's never held an executive position of
that kind and i think being governor of
california is probably the closest thing
to the presidency if that's possible
of any executive job in america today
because it is the most populous state
and i can only tell him that we reduced
in proportion to other states
the per capita spending the per capita
size of government we only increase the
size of government 1/12 what it had
increased in the preceding eight years
and one journal the san francisco
chronicle a respected newspaper said
there was no question about the fact
that governor reagan had prevented the
state of california from going bankrupt
our final question comes from soma
golden and it's directed to mr reagan
i'd like to switch the focus from
inflation to god
this week cardinal medeiros of boston
warned catholics that it's sinful to
vote for candidates who favor abortion
this did not defeat defeat the two men
he opposed but it did raise questions
about the role of church and state you
mr reagan have endorsed the
participation of fundamentalist churches
in your campaign and you mr anderson
have tried three times to amend the
constitution to recognize the quote law
and authority unquote of jesus christ my
question do you approve of the church's
actions this week in boston and should a
president be guided by organized
religion on issues like abortion equal
rights and defense spending mr rager a
boy i'm that's my question well whether
i agree or disagree with some individual
or what he may say or how he may say it
i don't think there's any way that we
can suggest that because people believe
in god and go to church that they should
not want reflected in those people and
those causes they support their own
belief in morality and in the high
traditions and principles which we've
abandoned so much in this country going
around this country i think that i have
found a great hunger in america for a
spiritual revival for a belief that a
law must be based on a higher law for a
return to traditions and values that we
once had our government in its most
sacred documents the constitution and
the declaration of independence and all
speak of man being created of a creator
that we're a nation under god now i have
thought for a long time that too many of
our churches have been too reluctant to
speak up in behalf of what they believe
is proper in government and they have
been to 2 lakhs in interfering in recent
years with government's invasion of the
family itself putting itself between
parent and child i vetoed a number of
bills of that kind to myself when i was
in california now whether it is right
for on a single issue for anyone to
advocate that someone should not be
elected or not
won't take a position on that but i do
believe that no one in this country
should be denied the right to express
themselves or to even try to persuade
others to follow their leader that's
what elections are all about ms golden
okay i i would point out that churches
are tax-exempt institutions and i'll
repeat my question do you approach do
you approve the church's action this
week in boston and should a president be
guided by organized religion on issues
like abortion equal rights and defense
spending miss golden certainly the
church has the right to take a position
on moral issues but to try as occurred
in the case that you mentioned that
specific case to try to tell the
parishioners of any church of any
denomination how they should vote or for
whom they should vote
i think violates the principle of
separation of church and state now
governor reagan is running on a platform
that calls for a constitutional
amendment banning abortion i think that
is a moral issue that ought to be left
to the freedom of conscience of the
individual and for the state to
interfere with a constitutional
amendment and tell a woman that she must
carry that pregnancy to term regardless
of her personal belief that i think
violates freedom of conscience as much
as anything that i can think of and he
is also running on a platform that
suggests a litmus test for the selection
of judges that only judges that hold a
certain quotes view on the sanctity of
family life ought to be appointed to the
federal judiciary one of the three great
independent branches of our government
no i believe in freedom of choice i
don't believe in constitutional
amendments that would interfere with
that i don't believe in trying to
legislate new tests for the selection of
the federal judiciary on the amendment
that you mentioned i abandoned it 15
years ago and i have said freely all
over this country that it was a mistake
for me or anyone to ever try to put the
judeo-christian heritage of this country
important as it is
and important as my religious faith is
to me it's a very deeply personal matter
but for me to try in this very
pluralistic society of ours to try to
frame any definition whatever of what
that belief should be is wrong and so
not once but twice in 1971 i voted on
the floor of the house of
representatives against a constitutional
amendment that tried to bring prayer
back into the public schools i think
mother ought to whisper to johnny into
susie as they buttoned their coats in
the morning and leave for the classroom
be sure to say a prayer before you start
your day's work but i don't think that
the state the board of regents a board
of education or any state official
should try to compose that prayer for a
child to recite mr aegina the litmus
test that john says is in the republican
platform says no more than the judges to
being appointed should have a respect
for innocent life now i don't think
that's a bad idea i think all of us
should have a respect for innocent life
with regard to the freedom of the
individual for choice with regard to
abortion there's one individual who's
not being considered at all that's the
one who's being aborted and i've noticed
that everybody that is for abortion has
already been born i
i think that technically i know this is
a difficult and an emotional problem and
many people sincerely feel on both sides
of this but i do believe that maybe we
could find the answer through medical
evidence if we would determine once and
for all is an unborn child a human being
i happen to believe it is mr anderson i
also think that that unborn child has a
right to be wanted and i also believe
sir that the most personal intimate
decision that any woman is ever called
upon to make is a decision as to whether
or not she shall carry a pregnancy to
turn and for the state to interfere in
that decision under whatever guise and
with whatever rationale for the state to
try to take over in that situation and
by edict command what the individuals
shall do and substitute itself for that
individuals conscience for her right to
consult her rabbi her minister her
priest her doctor any other counselor of
her choice i think goes beyond what we
want to ever see accomplished in this
country if we really believe in the
first amendment if we really believe in
freedom of choice and the right of the
individual mr reagan you now have three
minutes for closing remarks before
beginning my closing remarks here i
would just like to remark a concern that
i have that we have criticized the
failures of the carter policy here
rather considerably both of us this
evening and there might be some feeling
of unfairness about this because he was
not here to respond but i believe it
would have been much more unfair to have
had john anderson denied the right to
participate in this debate and i want to
express my appreciation to the league of
women voters for adopting a course with
which i believe the great majority of
americans are in agreement now as to my
closing remarks i've always believed
that this land was
tear between the two great oceans by
some divine plan it was placed here to
be found by a special kind of people
people who had a special love for
freedom and who had the courage to
uproot themselves and leave hearth and
homeland and come to what in the
beginning was the most undeveloped
wilderness possible we came from a
hundred different corners of the earth
we spoke a multitude of tongues landed
on this eastern shore and then went out
over the mountains and the prairies and
the deserts and the far western
mountains to the pacific building cities
and towns and farms and schools and
churches if wind water or fire destroyed
them we built them again and in so doing
at the same time we built a new breed of
human called an american a proud an
independent and a most compassionate
individual for the most part 200 years
ago tom paine when the 13 tiny colonies
were trying to become a nation said we
have it in our power to begin the world
over again today we're confronted with
the horrendous problems that we've
discussed here tonight and some people
in high positions of leadership tell us
that the answer is to retreat that the
best is over that we must cut back that
we must share in an ever increasing
scarcity that we must in the failure to
be able to protect our national security
as it is today we must not be
provocative to any possible adversary
well we the living americans have gone
through four wars we've gone through a
great depression in a lifetime that
literally was worldwide and almost
brought us to our knees but we came
through all of those things and we
achieved even new heights and new
greatness the living americans today
have fought harder paid a higher price
for freedom and done more to advance the
dignity of man that any people who ever
lived on this earth but 200 years we've
lived in the future believing that
tomorrow would be better than today and
today would be better than yesterday i
still believe that i'm not running for
the presidency because i
that i can solve the problems we
discussed tonight i believe the people
of this country can and together we can
begin the world over again we can meet
our destiny and that destiny to build a
land here that will be for all mankind a
shining city on a hill i think we ought
to get at it mr anderson you have the
final three minutes mr moyer president
carter was not right a few weeks ago
when he said that the american people
were confronted with only two choices
with only two men and with only two
parties i think you've seen tonight in
this debate that governor reagan and i
have agreed on exactly one thing we are
both against the re-imposition of a
peacetime draft we have disagreed i
believe on virtually every other issue i
respect him for showing tonight for
appearing here and i thank the league of
women voters for the opportunity that
they have given me i am running for
president as an independent because i
believe our country is in trouble i
believe that all of us are going to have
to begin to work together to solve our
problems if you think that i am a
spoiler consider these facts do you
really think that our economy is healthy
do you really think that 8 million
americans being out of work and the 50
unemployment among the youth of our
country are acceptable do you really
think that our armed forces are really
acceptable strong in those areas of
conventional capability where they
should be do you think that our
political institutions are working the
way they should when literally only half
of our citizens vote i don't think you
do think that and therefore i think you
ought to consider doing something about
it and voting for an independent in 1980
you know a generation of office seekers
has tried to tell the american people
that they could get something for
nothing it's been a time there for the
illusion and false hopes and the longer
it continues the more dangerous it
becomes we've got to stop drifting what
i wish tonight so desperately is that we
had had more time to talk about some of
the other issues that are so
fundamentally important a great
historian henry steele commander said
that in their lust for victory need
traditional party is looking beyond
november and he went on to cite three
issues that their platforms totally
ignore atomic warfare presidential
directive 59 notwithstanding if we don't
resolve that issue all others become
irrelevant the issue of our natural
resources the right of posterity to
inherit the earth and what kind of earth
will it be the issue of nationalism the
recognition he says that every major
problem confronting us is global and
cannot be solved by nationalism here or
elsewhere that is chauvinistic that is
parochial that is as anachronistic as
states rights was in the days of
jefferson davis those are some of the
great issues atomic warfare the use of
our natural resources and the issue of
nationalism that i intend to be talking
about in the remaining six weeks of this
campaign and i dare hope that the
american people will be listening and
that they will see that an independent
government of john anderson and patrick
lucey can give us the kind of coalition
government that we need in 1980 to begin
to solve our problems thank you mr
anderson we too wish there were more
time and for all the limitations of the
forum and there are other forms to try
the chair for one would like to see such
meetings become a regular and frequent
part of every presidential campaign mr
reagan mr anderson we thank you for
coming and thanks to our panelists
carol loomis daniel greenberg charles
cordray lemay jane brian quinn and soma
golden and thank you in the audience at
home for joining us this first
presidential debate of 1980 has been
brought to you as a public service by
the league of women voters education
fund i'm bill moyers